# Bryan Popka's Challenge 0. Translation Code

## Approach Used
I started by uploading the file to my companies Data Warehouse and then using our community edition MCP Server within GitHub CoPilot (Claude Sonnet 4.5) to begin analyzing the data with the help of an LLM. It allowed me to quickly sample the data set and gather a list of the most frequent agricultural terms in each language. I then created an augmented copy of the data set in which I appended the English translation of those terms to the QuestionTopic and ResponseTopic fields so that the Swahili, Lunganda, and Nyn records are now more densely populated with keywords for each question/response. This doesn't provide a word-for-word translation to English or necessarily provide complete context for the use of each term, but by evaluating the combination of terms (i.e. "chicken, medication" or "rain, grass") for each question/response you can infer context about the topic in a way that may more efficiently support further quantitative analysis than a word-for-word translation would provide.

## Notebooks:
    1. TopTerms - Analysis and charts of the top 10 agricultural terms in each language. The notebook includes SQL and results of the queries initially generated by CoPilot with modifications to show both the original term and Engligh translation, as well as charts depicting the frequency of those terms.
    2. ExtendedTerms - This notebook provides an initial analysis of how sparsely populated the QuestionTopic and ResponseTopic fields are for the Swahili, Lunganda, and Nyn content. Then using an extended list (60+) of the top terms in each language, I create a modified version of the data set with these terms appended to the QuestionTopic and ResponseTopic fields.

## Data Sources:
- Producers Direct data file was uploaded to S3 and initiall exposed as a foreign table in Teradata. It was then inserted into a local table for faster transformation and analysis
- Analysis and transformations were applied to create a more thorough set of keywords in the Question & Response Topic fields

Modified data file can be found here: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1stvJLtds7qE-m1t9oqGoF0CAX6sB-KWN/view?usp=drive_link

## Tools and Technologies
- **Programming Language**: SQL
- **GenAI Tools Used**: GitHub Copilot with Claude Sonnet 4.5
- **Other Tools**: Jupyter Notebook
